Thank you for the opportunity to speak. Can you hear me?
Yes.
My name's William McGumsey. I'm a former policy advisor, having worked for several
government departments on a range of projects over 15 years, and I
now work in independent media.
My submission focuses on the immigration risks posed by the free trade agreement.
However, rather than opposing the agreement outright, as many who share my concerns
around immigration do, I think those risks can be addressed by
changes to general immigration settings.
Outside of the risks I identify, I support the FTA because it
diversifies our export markets, reduces our dependence on
China, and because there is significant upside potential for trade and
economic benefits as the Indian economy grows.
The debate over the FTA comes in a context when most of our traditional
allies are moving to tighten their immigration settings.
The reason for this tightening is that Europe, the US, the UK, and Australia
have in recent years all experienced growing immigration-related problems
such as increased frequency of terror attacks, rising migrant crime,
threats to social cohesion, national identity, and trust in
institutions.
In December 2025, the US released an updated national security
strategy with border security at its center.
The strategy pointed out the problems mass migration is causing in Europe,
weakened social cohesion, political fragmentation, reduced state
legitimacy, and strain on welfare and public services.
The strategy also said that NATO allies may, over time,
become majority non-European, which might change their political
alignment and reliability as US partners.
Here in New Zealand, our own Security Intelligence Service, in its August
2025 Security Threat Environment report, identified the
risk of foreign political interference via diaspora populations
as a key problem facing New Zealand.
This is
of particular relevance to the debate around the FTA, as India's
Prime Minister Modi is on the record about his desire to use the Indian
diaspora as a soft power tool to influence Western governments.
Here, I'd like to note the link between diaspora lobbying and hate speech
laws.
Often, diaspora populations, through their ethnic lobbying
organizations, are some of the biggest proponents of hate speech
laws. And while genuine hate and racial vilification can be
present, hate speech laws are often used as a tool to
suppress public discussion of the activities of these lobbying
organizations and the ethnic diasporas they represent.
To restate this, one of the reasons to support free speech and
oppose hate speech laws is to ensure we can have public
transparency about the activities of ethnic lobbying
organizations and the ethnic diasporas
when they run contrary to the common good or the interests of other parts of the
population.
I can pause there if you want to have time for questions, or I can continue on and
sort of restate some of the specific threats and mitigations
I point out about the FTA itself.
Any questions at this stage?
No. Carry on please, William.
Okay. So particular risks posed by the FTA.
Increased permanent residence applications.
So although the migration provisions in the FTA have been
intelligently designed to be temporary, it will still have the
likely effect of widening the funnel at the front end and allowing
more migrants to meet the criteria and apply for permanent residence.
This is the single most important thing we need to do to mitigate the immigration
risks around the FTA, and that is to tighten the
permanent residence criteria or do away with it
completely as the Reform Party in the UK is now campaigning
on.
Risk number two is exploitation of the student visas and
intra-corporate and specialist transfer provisions in Annex
8K.
So these pathways are uncapped, and the potential exists
for them to be exploited to bring in more people than is appropriate or
desirable. So I suggest ongoing monitoring
with additional restrictions placed on education providers
or Indian investment and commercial activity if problems are
detected.
Risk three is around the investment provisions.
The FTA contains a so-called aspirational target for
US 20 billion investment into India over the next 15 years.
This is larger than all of New Zealand's current FDI put together,
and it seems unrealistic we would even meet this target.
And although we've been told we only have to promote investment towards it,
India appears to have powers under the agreement to instigate a
government-to-government consultation process and roll back some of the
FDA's trade concessions if it thinks New Zealand is not doing enough to meet the
target.
This poses risks for our firms if they commit to developing markets,
supply chains, investments in India, and then the trade access gets cut
off. So my request
to the committee or to officials is for some consideration about what the New
Zealand government could or should do if India chose to
exercise those powers.
Thank you. That's the end of my submission.
Excellent. Hey, thank you very much. Appreciate that final point too, William.
Thanks for taking the time.
Thank you.
Cheers.
Okay, we move now to the New Zealand Outdoors and Freedom
Party.
Good morning, everyone. How are we all doing today?
Good morning. Welcome along today. We've received your submission.
Yeah.
We are aware how it works. We have 10 minutes set down for you this morning.
We'll hand over to you. Thanks.
Awesome. Thank you so much. So my name is Daniel de Horobin.
I'm here on behalf of
the Outdoors and Freedom Party.
I've
got a master's in economics. I'm one of the
candidatesSo in the submission, we
pretty much
support
trade in general. We like the idea of
looking how we can help each other.
The problem is, in this case,
we feel that the trade agreement was probably
not as good as we could have made it.
For us,
at least when we analyzed it, it appeared imbalanced.
Even when taking into account
economy size differences, we're aware that India is a big
economy. They have experience doing these FTAs.
It's always a big challenge to get the best deal
out of the deal, as some would say. We seem to have
accepted a lot more commitments and concessions relative to other
countries.
There is also a timing issue. We've been trying this for a number of
years.
It seems that this agreement has been concluded under a clear political
commitment by the current ruling party.
This obviously doesn't prove it was rushed.
It just raises the question that were the hard issues genuinely
solved,
or were they considered deferred or worked around?
So just
for brevity, I'll focus on just two questions.
The $20 billion investments promotion, and
whether we got a good deal relative to the
concessions. The question is whether this
agreement is the best that we could have gotten or whether it
was rushed.
So firstly, I'm just going to address the $20 billion question.
We're aware, and we know, we've read it, that this is not a binding
obligation.
It does not legally compel our businesses to invest that.
There is no formal dispute resolution process if we do not.
It takes place after 15 years. If there's an issue with, I think
5 years and 10 years, there's some reviews that go on.
But the idea
of labeling it as aspirational, I
feel
when we make treaty commitments, even if it's non-binding, we still
have to have it, so is it possible for us
to meet this target? Part of
what I believe in good faith is
if we promote this investment, can we actually meet it?
The problem is, when we looked at the statistics,
the total outward direct investment to all countries was
$1.5 billion. Now, the FTA asks us to
promote--
Well, that's New Zealand, by the way.
So after we convert the $20 billion to
New Zealand dollars, and obviously average it over
15 years, it seems like it's about New Zealand
$2.2 billion per year into that one country alone.
And again, we're aware that the
current trend in New Zealand of the supporters is
that it's only an aspiration. When I was checking on the
Indian
government's, kind of, I'm telegraphing on their media,
they seem to ascribe it more as an expectation.
So maybe there's a difference in framing between how we see it and they see it.
It seems as though we're relying on the technicality of the fact that it's
just an aspiration. Whereas there,
I'm telegraphing that it's more of an expectation.
There's at least two sources for that.
Our idea is that we're raising this issue not because
we face immediate problems, because obviously as
the treaty states, after 15 years,
we
need to still take this seriously and treat it as an
actual goal almost so that we can show that
we don't have to be bound to certain things to be able to be
trusted.
And that's pretty much
how we feel about that one commitment.
Now, the second part is whether the deal itself,
could we have done better, basically. Could the negotiators have done better?
Well,
dairy access,
when we researched it, we saw that no other country got dairy
access. So it seems on the appearance that India protects
its dairy sector quite strongly. So perhaps,
maybe we have to accept that India is not going to let us in for their dairy.
And that is our largest export sector.
So if that's excluded, then the committee must ask whether the remaining
benefits are strong enough to justify everything that we have conceded so
far.
On the tariff restraints itself, again,
India is a big economy, we're a much smaller one.
They're quite strong within negotiations.
We've pretty much conceded almost
everything,
whereas theirs are a lot higher than ours.
Theirs are still having a lot of quota-based, partial or
conditional
criteria with their tariffs.
One example I'll state is kiwi fruit.
We've been looking at the kiwi fruit sector recently.
We did get some market access, but it's heavily quota-limited,
seasonal, price-thresholded,
and it's actually tied to New Zealand helping
develop India's own kiwi fruit industry through
their action plan.
And that raises a direct question.
Are we gaining long-term export access in regards to the
industry, or are we actually funding
their development, and are we kind of shooting ourselves in the foot a little bit
here with this particular one?This is one example that we've gone
through.
And again, there's labor mobility things.
It seems as though compared
to the UK and some other countries, we conceded a little bit more than
we needed to on the immigration side, even though it's
not really a whole lot of immigration.
It's not really the main focus, but it is a bit of a
concession.
India did make some structural commitments.
But
again, it seems as though we have made tons of concessions
everywhere, and India's made a few.
And again, economy thing, I still wonder if maybe we could have gotten a better
deal.
The question really for this committee is not whether there's any benefits because
of course, there are, of course, trade agreements help our exporters.
It's about whether they've actually been
forecasted.
For example, the 20 billion question, it seems as though from
note two of Article 9.2,
that
the 20 billion objective is based on India's growth.
And if we're going by technicality, it doesn't state whether New
Zealand's economy was ever considered in that
analysis. Maybe it has, but just hasn't been officially
recognized.
So to conclude,
we believe in
free trade. We believe that we can get good agreements.
We do not oppose a trade with China.
Sorry, India.
But a trade agreement should not be judged by whether a deal was signed, whether
promise was kept.
It should actually be judged by whether the final bargain is fair for both sides,
and it's the best for both sides, and that's kind of the challenge here.
On the evidence available to us from our analysis, we don't believe it's been
met, and we recommend that it shouldn't be ratified, and it should go back to
the negotiating table if possible.
All right.
Yeah. Sorry, go. Yeah, questions. Go ahead.
Thank you very much. Question, Honorable Damien O'Connor.
Look, very briefly, you've quoted, "Without additional direct financial
incentive from the government or without the government itself attempting to fill
a gap, the numbers simply don't add up." In relation to the investment
level, what do you mean by that?
So
again,
our foreign direct investment, at least from
statistics-wise globally, in 2025 was
$1.46
billion.
So is
the government suggesting that over the next 15 years that
our foreign direct investment will double and whether that will go directly to
India?
Yeah. Okay.
Your question was really around incentives, what kind of incentives you would think
from government.
Well, I know that Callaghan Innovation does a co
R&D thing. It would have to be
a promotion. They would have to do some sort of
co-investment.
Yeah. I suppose you're asking me to kind of answer your quandary.
Mm-hmm.
And my thing was that should have been done before agreeing to
it, but.
Okay. Thank you.
All right. Thank you, Damien. Appreciate your time this morning.
Okay. Thank you so much. You have a good day, sir.
Okay, next submitter is Arpit Joshi.
Yes, sir.
Excellent. Welcome.
Thank you.
So you've seen how it works. We've got five minutes set aside.
We've already seen your petition. We welcome your comments.
Sure.
And I'm sure there will be questions for you. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you for the opportunity.
My name is Arpit Joshi. I'm a law student interested in intellectual
property.
And I'm a New Zealand citizen, born in India, lived here for 20 years, so you can
see that I've got an interest in both parties.
Mm-hmm.
I would like to draw the committee's attention on one issue arising between
chapter nine and chapter 11,
intellectual property generation and governance of it.
I'll take three minutes of your time to submit my
submission and then allow the rest of the time for
questions.
Chapter nine commits New Zealand to facilitating 20 billion
US dollars investment to India over 15 years.
The activities contemplated include research and development,
technology transfer, joint ventures, and digital
services. These activities, in my belief, it's naturally
going to generate intellectual property and rights issues.
Chapter 11 governs that particular part of the
intellectual property, largely restating trips and VIPO
reliance, which is a domestic law issue.
However, whenever the disputes arise
over licensing, ownership, or commercial
use, agreement leaves resolution to the private
parties for contracting. However, the concern here is that the
framework does not match the relationship that the agreement is
designed to create.
Article 17.5 of the agreement establishes 11
committees and four working groups to administer
the relationship once it enters into force.
They are covering trade in goods, services,
customs facilitation, sanction measures, technical
barriers, rules of origin,
investment promotion, agriculture,
etcetera.
None of them are covering intellectual property, which is slightly contrary
to other comparative FTAs that we've already got
with other countries.For comparison, in my written
submission, I've done an analysis between EU and China,
and there are quite a lot of things that we have already done, agreed to at the
forefront of it versus an Indian FTA, we have not done
so.
National Interest Analysis document has identified this at
4.10.2,
and if I quote,
"Will limit future possible policy flexibility for New Zealand to
tailor its intellectual property regulatory system to
respond to domestic issues as they arise."
Solution for this, in my view, is pretty simple,
that we need to have this
governance sort of committee at forefront so that we can
facilitate tech-related investments that might generally
be part of this agreement. That is all from me.
Happy to take any questions.
Thank you very much. All right, first question, Dr Lawrence Yun.
Thank you, Chair.
So this is really interesting in terms of this interaction with
TRIPS, and I'm interested to see that it says it's TRIPS consistent
and WIPO consistent.
My question then is, what then would the,
from both parties when it comes to domestic and private
regulations around intellectual property when it comes to things like our Kiwi
Fruit Action Plan and Apple Action Plan, the Honey Action Plan, because
once things get shared and things get spread,
that's it. That's open more competition, potentially
has the option to open more competition between domestic and
exports. Absolutely.
So if I understood your question, you're talking about the governance of that or
specifically sharing-
Just I guess, in terms of what are the risks,
in terms of some of the action plans that we have now proposed in the context of
intellectual property.
I guess risk would be to any other business doing business internationally
really. FTA particularly binds us to
have those sort of
things to be done in certain manner in terms of the investment that we've signed
up for.
Problem there is bureaucratic systems within the both countries are different, and
the backlog within the legal system in India versus in New Zealand, there's quite a
gap there. So yes, there could be trade secrets done
within the litigations and within the legal firms.
However, whenever an issue arises, that's where the problem is.
How do you
fast-pace that?
Quick question from Angie Walters.
Thank you for your submission.
You're welcome.
Am I correct that even though there's not a specific committee, the Joint
Commission could still address issues of IP, and that given the
baseline TRIPS still holds, that there could also be a
complaint to the WTO? So those two avenues are still open.
They are open, and then again, I just want to go back to, yes, this is your
standard practice for IP, right? However, if I'm
thinking about university startups and younger tech
entrepreneurs. India being a bigger market, you may want to experiment your
product into that market, and without the IP protections that are
sort of managed by the government or some sort of guidance that is provided by
perhaps MB or MFAT,
that might sort of give a little bit more confidence in terms of
entering into that venture.
Thank you.
All right. Quick start with-
Really quick start. Does the Intellectual Properties Office do
that now? Because I believe that with the EU FTA,
they have a team within the Intellectual Properties Office.
Would it be the same or could we have the same for the India FTA?
Exactly.
Okay.
That's exactly what my submission is saying.
The only thing I found discrepancy-wise is that it's not
recorded in those series of activities that we had signed.
That we're going to do that. Okay.
Yeah.
So we can-
All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Joshi. Time this morning.
You're welcome.
Cheers.
Thank you.
All right. Very good point. Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you.
We come now to Mark Cooper.
We'd like to have Mark, but we have the-
He's not on. Not available.
No.
Okay. We'll move instead to Dairy Companies Association of New Zealand.
Morning.
Day or morning?
Yes.
Okay, so we have 10 minutes sit down for your submission this morning.
Welcome you along, Kimberly and Dai.
Excellent.
We've seen your submission,
the actual submission, and welcome your comments to that.
Thank you.
Yes, good morning. Can you hear me fine?
Yes. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Yeah, thank you for the opportunity to speak to DCAN's submission on
the free trade agreement.
We acknowledge the human error, the wrong document was initially uploaded to the
submission portal,
and rather than our intended submission.
So we understand the committee has now received that, and we
appreciate the understanding of that human error.
We acknowledge that
there was advocacy undertaken during the negotiation process, but our
focus today is on the question of ratification.
So the central point of our
submission is that DCANs supports
ratification of this agreement.
It delivers benefits for other New Zealand export sectors,
and there is no advantage to dairy from it
not being ratified.
But our support should not be mistaken for satisfaction.
For dairy, this is a very limited outcome, and it should
be recognized as such. India is
one of the most important long-term dairy markets,
in the world. It is large, um-... growing has
structural deficits at certain times of the year, and
is likely to face a widening gap between demand and
its domestic supply.
So the agreement, in our view, does not match that opportunity.
At best, it just gets us to the starting line.
The dairy package covers three tariff lines only,
about 3.8% of New Zealand's current global dairy
trade by value.
Only two get tariff elimination. The third,
milk albumin, remains constrained by a tariff quota,
and an 11% in quota tariff.
So for us, that's not yet a platform for meaningful
growth.
And we know, more is possible. India has already offered
better dairy access to others in products that matter to New Zealand,
including the UK for milk albumin, casein and
infant formula, and Australia for infant formula as
well.
We believe New Zealand dairy exporters should not be left at a
structural disadvantage.
We welcome commitment to consult if India
liberalizes further for others. But the mechanism
is narrow. It only applies to HS Chapter 04,
excluding the aforementioned products, and only where
access is granted through a WTO consistent agreement,
not the increasingly frequent, more partial agreements that
take place. So if New Zealand is serious about improving
dairy access, those review mechanisms will need to be used
deliberately to advance our dairy access.
There is the import for re-export commitment.
That could be useful, but it is only if it is simple,
workable, and really capable of supporting real
trade flows.
Our message is ratify the agreement, but do not treat
dairy market access as settled.
For dairy, this agreement has not yet delivered the platform needed
for a durable trade relationship.
That's why the review provisions really matter.
There is a general review after one year, and then every two years
after that. Those reviews need to be used actively to secure
better dairy access, not simply just a
box-ticking exercise.
And I guess more broadly, dairy must stay a clear priority
in New Zealand's trade agenda through closing gaps in FTA
coverage, upgrading existing agreements, and tackling
subsidy distortions and non-tariff
barriers that exist. We're already seeing why that matters.
New Zealand is now, for example, at a tariff disadvantage to the US
in Bangladesh. Canada's subsidy settings
continue to distort competition and risk value-added trade erosion,
and the EU has recently demonstrated it will do better for
other dairy exporters whilst its agreement with New Zealand
contains significant unfinished business for dairy.
Got to remember, dairy remains New Zealand's largest goods
export sector, yet it is still one of the sectors most exposed to
tariffs,
subsidies, and non-tariff barriers.
So
in summary, our asks are simple. First, ratify the agreement,
but be clear the dairy outcome is limited and
unfinished. Second, use the review processes
and the wider trade agendas to keep pushing for materially
better dairy trade opportunities in
India over the duration of this agreement and beyond.
Thank you, and welcome questions.
Right. Thank you very much for those comments.
First question, Honorable Damien O'Connor.
Look, thank you. I'd just like to lead off with a couple of points, actually.
I mean, the dairy industry's the largest exporter from our country, and this
select committee is hearing
evidence on a trade agreement that we thought is very significant.
I would have thought you could've turned up in person.
There are a lot of people who are making the effort to turn up in person, so that's
a comment I'll leave with you. Particularly given the mistake that was made
with the submission, I would've thought you could've come in and explained
it. Can I just ask you, is this a commercially meaningful
outcome for dairy?
Yeah, I think from our point of view, we recognize that it's more
of a commercial opportunity as an outcome.
As I mentioned, 3.8% of value by goods
exported.
It's limited, and it's unfinished.
So
do you feel you have been left at a market disad- access
disadvantage
relative to other partners?
Yes. As our submission said, and as Guy
said, for milk albumin, we will be at a market
disadvantage to the UK, and the same for
caseins.
And for
infant formula, there is a disadvantage to
the UK and Australia. Those are disadvantages
that we would like to focus on leveling up over
time. For the other products that India has
opened for no one yet,
then the playing field is level with no one
having access.
Can I ask one more? Sorry, Mr. Chairman.
And that is the one around there's been some
highlighting of the fact that re-export out of India is an
opportunity for the dairy industry, but some of the
submissions and evidence we have is a bit confusing on that.
Does that provide a real opportunity
or not?
The extent of that opportunity will very much come down
to the details of the mechanism that
is still being worked through.
So the fact that there will be a fast track has been agreed
and is in the agreement. The details of that fast track and
how it will specifically work are not known, and
unfortunately, these mechanisms are mechanisms
where the devil, where the commercial usability can very much
be in the detail. We will be engaging with New
Zealand officials
to work in
support of them to make sure that the detail is usable detail
as it's agreed.
Thank you. Good.
All right. Thank you very much for your time this morning.
Appreciate your submission. Cheers.
Thank you.
Okay, we move now to Roy Menzies.
Good evening, gentlemen.
Morning, Mr. Menzies. We have received your submission.
We have five minutes set down for you this morning. Over to you.
Thank you very much. I'd just like to reiterate, I oppose the
inclusion of Article 13.2 in the New
Zealand-India FTA
for the following reasons.
The principle of equal citizenship, democracy, and constitutional
accountability.
It's the introduction of an unnecessary contentious
ideology unrelated to trade.
It has no connection to trade at all, and neither to trade
liberalization between the two countries.
And it injects a contested
concept that is unrelated
to the whole issue of trade.
On another point,
UNRIP is not a trade instrument. It has no commercial
purpose.
And very significantly, India has inserted
express reservations protecting its constitutional
purpose,
but New Zealand has not.
New Zealand even voted against the UNRIP in
because it creates different classes of
citizenship, and coming from a country where we have so many different castes and
creeds,
and so much of contention because of that, I can see, I
have
knowledge firsthand of how destructive that could be to the fabric of the
country.
UNRIP does tend to create different classes of citizenship
and could impact on lawful property ownership.
The important thing is India has specifically expressed a
reservation
against this, and I think
New Zealand must, too.
Approval of this Article 13.2 could be seen as an
endorsement
of UNRIP,
and the way this whole
FTA process is managed definitely lacks
transparency. Even one of the ministers involved
in a live interview claimed he was not aware of that, he would have to look into
it.
I think this whole issue, before including this issue, it needs a
much larger debate in front of the whole country.
So my
strong view is this Article 13.2 must be removed.
Thank you very much. Any questions
from members? All right. Appreciate your time this morning, Mr.
Menzies. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay, we come now to John Eaton.
Good morning.
Excellent. Okay, we've received your submission.
We have five minutes set down for you this morning, Mr. Eaton.
We'll hand over to you. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Before I begin, I'd like to thank the committee for the opportunity to present my
firm opposition to the proposed free trade agreement with Republic of
India.
Today, I will address the potentially significant trade deficit
that will result from this agreement.
Trade agreements should be judged by a very simple question:
Who gave what up?
Who got what in return?
And does it benefit both parties?
In New Zealand's context, a good trade deal would mean our primary industries and
agricultural sector
get virtually unlimited access
to India's market. And in India's context, it means the ability to
import their goods and services into our country also with virtually
zero restrictions.
Ladies and gentlemen, I regret to inform you that this free trade agreement
does not meet that threshold.
New Zealand relinquishes its right to export
meat to India, except sheep meat, as India produces very
little of it,
permanently under tariff-free restrictions.
As well as our wine and honey,
except premium price Manuka honey.
However, we must be 100% duty free
for all tariff lines of Indian products coming into New
Zealand in unlimited quantities.
This, of course, combined with New Zealand agreeing to provide the equivalent of
20 billion US dollars
in private sector investment in India
over 15 years,
makes it a very one-sidedAn
arguably
pointless arrangement.
India also reserves the right to suspend market access
or bring back tariffs on our goods
if India,
at its sole discretion,
decides New Zealand has under-delivered on investment,
or we sell too cheaply for their liking
via anti-dumping tariffs.
I also wish to remind this committee that the goods we get
tariff reductions for are just that, reductions,
not outright removals
as we are obligated to give India.
Let me give a few examples of such.
Apples.
We're securing a reduction
of a 50% tariff
to a 25% tariff,
and we can only import 45,000 metric tons of apples,
only after six years, though,
to even receive such a discount.
We also have to stay within a seasonal window
of the 1st of April
and the 31st of August,
and must have a minimum import price of
$1.25 US
per kilogram.
Kiwi fruit,
you must remain within a quota of 15,000 metric tons.
Like with apples, this only kicks in after year six as well, please note.
Import only between the 1st of April and the 15th of October,
and import for a minimum price of
$1.80 US per kilogram
to get duty-free status on arguably our national fruit.
In conclusion, ladies and gentlemen,
this has very little benefit for our farmers and prevents us from
exporting our primary industries
in substantial numbers
to the fastest-growing population on Earth.
It is also unfair regarding tariff reduction,
quotas, and time frames compared to what we must do in
return.
As such, this deal must either be torn up and renegotiated
or chucked in the scrap heap, never to be brought up again.
Thank you very much, and I welcome all questions.
All right.
Have we any questions for Mr. Eaton?
All right. Thank you very much. We appreciate your contribution
on this submission. Thank you.
Okay, next up we have
Alicia Riley.
Hi.
Yep.
Hello.
Alicia and Joshua. Okay. Yeah. Good morning. We've received your submission.
Morning. We have five minutes set down for you today. Over to you.
Yep.
Yeah, Alicia's not feeling-
A bit under the weather, so Josh will help me.
He is going to do my presentation today.
Yeah.
But I'll be here for questions.
So we're both with Sovereign, Alicia and Joshua. She's my wife.
Also Secretary of Sovereign.
I'll just present hers, if that's all right.
She just has an oral submission about three minutes long, and then I've got mine
for Sovereign at 9:25, so in five minutes from now.
Okay.
Yep.
So Alicia, she sort of changed up her oral submission based
on what she's seen in the Far North District Council, where we live.
And so the UNDRIP is probably a really important part of the FTA to
address, so she's got a statement on that that I'll just present.
Buried in the FTA is Article 13.2, a clause that doesn't just
acknowledge UNDRIP, it formally affirms New Zealand's commitment to it.
That distinction matters more than it might sound.
With the UK and European trade agreements, New Zealand's position on UNDRIP
was merely to note it, which is a diplomatic nod.
This agreement affirms UNDRIP. The word affirm creates an active
endorsement. Our courts already presume that legislation should be read
consistently with ratified international commitments, that one word,
affirm, turns a trade deal clause into a legal lever that touches on
indigenous rights in ways that nobody seems to understand.
So what does it actually look like?
If UNDRIP were applied by the courts, it would effectively hand Iwi veto
rights over resource consents, infrastructure projects, and
potentially legislation itself.
Canada affirmed UNDRIP, and now the courts are applying it to mining permits,
foreshore rights, and infrastructure approvals.
We'd be stepping into the same path through a trade agreement clause that the Trade
Minister himself can't even explain.
And this committee doesn't need to look overseas for a warning.
It's already happening here. The Far North District Council has appointed 10
unelected Iwi representatives with full voting rights.
Now it's reported the same council is moving to sign agreements
ceding sovereignty to five Iwi.
Councillor Davina Smolders hasn't called it co-governance.
She called it a takeover. And that's happening without a treaty affirming UNDRIP.
Ratifying Article 13.2 would give such ideas legal backing.
Courts would look to a council surrendering sovereignty to Iwi or the Crown itself
doing so and find it perfectly consistent with New Zealand's affirmed
international obligations.
Here's where it gets truly difficult for the government.
National's coalition agreement with New Zealand First explicitly commits to not
recognizing UNDRIP as having a legal binding effect in New Zealand.
New Zealand First went further. Their policy was to withdraw from UNDRIP
altogether.
Yet Parliament is now being asked to ratify a clause that contradicts that
commitment outright on a trade provision that even the Trade Minister
himself can't explain how it ended up in the agreement.
Before this committee recommends ratification, three serious questions need to be
asked. First, who inserted this clause, and was Cabinet
consulted? Second, has Crown Law advised on its
interpretive effect on domestic law?
And third, how does National reconcile this with their own coalition
agreement?This committee's job is to make sure that a clause buried in a
trade deal inserted by an unknown party without the minister's
knowledge or agreement doesn't just get waved through.
Because if it does, Parliament will have handed the iwi the ability to override
parliamentary decisions throughout the courts.
And we will have affirmed that activists have the right to insert provisions
into treaties which the government does not agree with.
The committee should be honest with itself about whether this is the future it
wants for New Zealand's democratic representation, and if affirming UNDRIP is
actually as benign as the narrative from National and Act.
All right. Thank you very much.
Yeah.
Yes, sorry. So appreciate you are also the next submitter.
Did you want to flow into that, or would you like us to pause for
questions on that piece?
Yeah, if you have any questions for that, but-
From members.
Sorry, I just can't-
Honorable member
... it's a bit hard. Look, thank you, but you got a background noise there.
What accent do you have?
Me? I'm from Texas.
Right. Okay. Thank you.
Yep.
All right. Laura McClure.
Thanks, Leisha and Josh, for your submission.
My question really is
around the wording of UNDRIP in the actual agreement itself.
It has been suggested its
inclusion
is more of a symbolic thing as opposed to actually having any
real weight or meaning because of the wording.
It doesn't say must or has to.
Yeah. So a lot of people have said that UNDRIP itself isn't binding.
It's not binding with the UN. But in practice, courts say, "Hey, look,
we've
signed up to UNDRIP, so we have to recognize it in our decisions." So when a judge
makes a sort of legislative decision, it's somewhat subjective.
They can put weight on the fact that we signed UNDRIP.
And the difference, as I noted at the beginning, between just noting
UNDRIP in a trade deal and the word affirm is substantially
different. And a court could easily look at the affirm
and say, "Look, we've affirmed UNDRIP.
We have to abide by it in all of our decisions." And that is a
typical thing that the courts do when they look at international treaties that
we've signed.
People want to say that it's benign, or India didn't ask for it, and New
Zealand asked for it. I'm pretty sure that's the case.
India may not care whether we comply with it or not, but courts do in New Zealand.
So I think that's the biggest issue.
Thank you for your submission.
Excellent.
Thank you.
All right. We'll move on to then the second piece on behalf of
Sovereign.
Yeah. Thank you.
So Sovereign is a political advocacy group.
We've got a think tank that produces policies, and
we've got principles and such on our website.
We're advocating mostly for national sovereignty.
That's our main goal for New Zealand,
that we are independent of international bodies and regulations.
We make our own decisions internally in New Zealand.
I'm Joshua Riley, co-founder of Sovereign, and I'm here to present
Sovereign's submission on the FTA.
I'll start by just mentioning that Todd McClay has said that the
FTA cannot be renegotiated. So that means that this select
committee has two options, either to suggest ratification
or to approve the enabling legislation or to
reject the entire FTA. And I think
I'm not sure if the committee understands that based on Todd McClay's words, those
are really the only two options. It's not about, oh, what could we have done
different or what we could do next time, but it's more like on this FTA,
should we approve it in its current state because we can't renegotiate it?
I'll
go through some of the issues that Sovereign has with this.
You'll hear a lot about the 5,000 immigrant cap in
the FTA. You'll hear this repeatedly through the media.
Members of Parliament have repeated it in hopes of dispelling
concerns about mass immigration through the FTA.
The 5,000 cap is merely one part of the immigration channel that the
FTA opens up. There's a couple others that are major,
and those are uncapped. The first is student visas.
They are uncappable. So we
say that, "Oh, we don't cap student visas," but we do have the right in the
Immigration Act 2009 to cap those visas.
But we have removed our right to cap Indian
student visas specifically. So if that channel opens up and we get
way too many people, we have removed our sovereign right to
control our own immigration flow.
So those student visas also allow during study work
rights and post-study
employment for up to three years. So that produces for them the work history that
they need and the education to be able to flow into existing permanent
resident pathways, such as the skilled migrant visa.
And then there's the specialist visa channel, which is also uncapped.
It requires no prior work experience and no labor market test.
So we're having unskilled people come in.
The company has to say that this person knows some
proprietary part of the technology the company uses, and suddenly
they're a specialist. There was a nearly identical visa structure in the
UK.
It was shut down in 2021 because it was being exploited.
Indian companies were being set up, and they were hiring Indian
workers. Other companies were laying off their local employees in
favor of hiring people from India.
So, literally that was shut down in 2021 because it was being exploited.
We have a very similar structure here where an Indian company can simply set up
a corporate office here, just a satellite office.
It can just be a commercial lease space.
They don't have to be a New Zealand employer.
And suddenly they can bring in thousands of their workers from India, claiming that
they have technological expertise in something that that company does.
So the difference, though, between us and the UK is that the
FTAPrevents us from being able to cap that channel.
The same channel that has been exploited in the UK is
being specifically opened up and the doors are ripped off.
We cannot close it in the future.
You have to ask, whose idea was this, and were they aware that permanently opening
that channel has already been exploited?
Next, we have the issue of looming AI influence on our job
market. On Mike Hosking's show, Luxon admitted that there is a
looming technological disruption in the UK.
The same is true here for New Zealand, and that's through AI.
National's reducing government employees because of AI.
The same disruption and job reduction will affect the entire nation.
National's response is to lock open, via uncap-able visa channels, the door for
India to flood our job market. India is 300 times our size and has a
median wage of 1/35 of New Zealand's.
National, Labour, and Act, by agreeing to this FTA, are allowing India to
directly compete with New Zealand's job market.
We have the highest unemployment rate since 2015, and AI
disruption is expected to replace 30% of work tasks by
2030.
So what do we get for all this immigration and job competition, loss of our
sovereign right to control our own immigration flows?
That is an estimated annual GDP rise of
0.07% by 2036. That comes out
to about $382 million a year. Important to put that into
context. National has borrowed an average of $500 million
every two weeks this term. So in
two weeks, we borrowed more than the entire GDP will give us annually 10 years
from now. The Motu economic assessment also assumed that New
Zealand will have full employment, which isn't the case now, and it hasn't been
since prior to 2015.
It also failed to consider the impact of having the $20
billion US
FDI commitment invested domestically instead of India.
So what is the opportunity cost of that investment that we're forcing into India?
And speaking of that FDI commitment, National said that it was
aspirational. But Article 9.10 of the FTA says that
that claim is false. If New Zealand fails to promote the
US $20 billion of private investment into India within 15
years, India can claw back its previous tariff concessions.
India has the sole discretion to determine if that commitment was met with
no real remedy of arbitration.
Do any of the members that are here on the panel, do
you know what our total FDI investment is
accumulated over decades currently overseas?
It's not the convention the question should be asked.
Yeah. Well, it's kind of important because I don't think anybody knows this.
It's 16 billion US dollars. So in all of time, we've accumulated
a total of $16 billion of foreign investment overseas.
That's FDI, the same FDI that's referred to in the FTA.
The FTA commits New Zealand to invest more than that into one country in
15 years.
That's unreasonable.
Economically, that would be nearly impossible for New Zealand to achieve.
In an attempt to meet this massive investment, NZTE is already
encouraging New Zealand companies to move overseas to India and take advantage
of their lower wages. The FTA obligates New Zealand to
teach India our apple and kiwi growing skills as well as our honey
production skills. These are the very products which National claims India will buy
from us. Once they have our skills, there's less need to import those products.
And then we'll get to the democratic process of this.
The leaders of National, Act, and Labour confirmed they would pass the FTA
legislation before their constituents had access to the text.
During this time, both Todd McClay and Christopher Luxon stated that future
governments would be able to place caps on student visas.
They later corrected their statements.
In March, Erica Stanford chastised Winston Peters for claiming FTA visas
would allow family members. Winston was right, but her post is still up.
Erica claimed the FTA visa was for high-skilled workers like
doctors, specifically, despite the FTA including no provisions for doctor
visas. She appealed to her involvement in drafting the visa mandates when making
these misleading claims. In conclusion, the treaty as written resembles an
immigration pact much more than it does an FTA.
The immigration implications are dangerous for New Zealand.
The benefits are small and based on optimistic assumptions.
The entire FTA hinges on outlandish expectations that New Zealand private
companies
will be able to invest more into India in 15 years than the total accumulated
foreign investment globally for all of New Zealand's history.
When India claws back its tariffs in 15 years, they won't claw
back the thousands of immigrants we imported.
I urge this committee to consider the future of their nation, your
children, and our people. This FTA should not be ratified, and doing so would be
a betrayal of not just logic and reason, but of the nation.
All right. Thanks-
Any questions?
... Josh. Any questions from members?
You don't appear to be any further.
Thank you very much for your time to both of you this morning.
Yep.
Cheers.
Thank you.
Okay, we move now to Zespri.
They're not in the room are they?
Hmm, that's strange.
Rachel looks different.
Good morning, Rachel.
Almost.
Morning, Michael. How are you? Welcome along to the committee this morning.
We've received your submission. You know how this works.
We have 10 minutes set down for you. I'll hand over to you.
Perfect. Hey, appreciate the time, everyone, and thanks for having us.
So just to make some remarks at the top, and then obviously really happy to take
your questions. So my name is Michael Fox.
I'm the head of Global Public Affairs at Zespri.
So we are the sales and marketing organization for Zespri kiwifruit, and we are
owned by New Zealand growers.
We strongly support the ratification of the India-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement.
For our industry, this is a step change in market access, and it
does open the door to a major opportunity for us.
For context, so Zespri saw global fruit sales of $5.9 billion last
season,
and we have a 2035 strategy to grow that by two and three times by
2035 as part of our ambition to be the world's healthiest fruit brand.
Our brand platform, Growing For Good, outlines our intention to grow value in a way
that's good for communities and good for consumers around the world.
In terms of India, it is a large and rapidly growing market for Zespri kiwifruit.
We have been operating there for a decade, and while we've seen steady growth in
demand, we haven't been able to meet that demand due to the 33%
tariff. The season before last, Zespri paid roughly
one third of our revenue at the border, so $9 million tariff and $27
million in sales. So it did make the market uneconomic relative to
other markets around the world. The FTA does change that.
It provides duty-free access for New Zealand kiwifruit within a quota starting at
6,250 tons in year one through to 15,000
tons in year six.
It delivers tariff relief of about $125 million over those five years,
as well as obviously its ability to allow us to invest in that market.
And it is one of the most comprehensive market access outcomes for kiwifruit into
India
globally.
So in our view, this
agreement will help deliver significant value to New Zealand, and Zespri is
committed to delivering on that value.
So in terms of how it works, it translates to value for growers with improved
access, supporting more consumer demand and underpinning orchard gate returns.
Ultimately, it gives us confidence to invest in developing the market.
So what happens is when we enter a new market, we over-invest to build
demand,
and to obviously increase awareness of Zespri kiwifruit at high
value and then to grow sales in that market.
So it would see us investing in sales and marketing.
It would see us supporting our supply chain partners and giving them certainty to
invest. It will see us building long-term consumer demand in a way that
delivers sustainable returns, and building long-term mutually beneficial partners
in market that create value in both countries.
Our view is this agreement too is a really good example of government and industry
working well together. So Damien, you're very well aware of this.
We worked closely with you during your time as trade minister and a lot of this
work began then. But we have been advocating for this
partnership approach for a number of years.
So before the FTA was there, Zespri saw an opportunity to work alongside Indian
growers in return for that improved market access, and we've spent a lot of time
building trusted partnerships in market with the government, and central
government and state governments, and people who supported the proposal.
And it did help position New Zealand as a trusted partner, and we think it gives us
a really good platform moving forward.
So it did result in the Kiwifruit Action Plan.
So that sits alongside the tariff changes with the New Zealand industry
investing in a five-year collaboration between New
Zealand and Indian growers, focused on improving orchard productivity
and quality, focused on Indian green kiwifruit varieties, growing
post-harvest and supply chain performance, and building demand which supports
New Zealand growers in our season, and then Indian growers in their season.
They are counter seasonal to us. So it's a really positive
partnership that creates long-term value, like I say, in both countries.
More broadly, the agreement does support a stronger trading relationship with India
moving forward. And I guess one thing we would make about the deal too is,
while it's very positive, we also think it should improve over time.
So if we can execute the Kiwifruit Action Plan well, if we can do
what we said we'd do, if we can add clear value to Indian communities, if we build
long-term supply chain partnerships, if we can show that Indian businesses
succeed alongside New Zealand businesses, then we would expect to see market access
improve over time as those relationships are built, and we build good supportive
partnerships in market and obviously advocates in market.
So we actually see the deal as a start, and we're committed to helping to build on
it to create value for New Zealand into the future.
In terms of opportunity in the market, so from that $27 million I mentioned,
we think it has the potential to be a $600 odd million market in 10 years.
So the opportunity there based on demand, based on the health conscious consumers,
based on the growing economy, and the size of the market, obviously, we think the
opportunity is immense.
So to close, it removes a longstanding barrier to a
high growth market for us. It does allow us to invest in developing that market.
It does so alongside a credible cooperation framework that
strengthens the New Zealand India relationship.
It is a material step forward for us, and it's very welcome, particularly in a
time when the world is increasingly hard to do business with.
These sorts of agreements send a positive message, and it does allow us to create
value for New Zealand. So just to acknowledge the huge amount of work that's gone
in from the Prime Minister and Minister Maclay, acknowledge your efforts,
Damien, and the teams that have helped to make this happen.
We look forward to
utilizing this agreement to create value for New Zealand.
Excellent. Thank you very much for this quick question. Dr Lawrence Yun.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much for coming.
Can I just check, you mentioned something, I wanted to specifically talk about the
Kiwifruit Action Plan, the KAP. You mentioned before
that's only the green variety, right? Not the golden or the red variety.
Correct.
Cool. And can I just check following on from that, one of the
submitters we had before talks about in terms of intellectual property, and I know
that this is something that we've done in terms of some of the other regions as
well. What are the risks to our domestic growers if, for
example, that potential IP gets out of control
and there is, for example, even if there's any IP challenges
in Indian quarter, et cetera, that the backlog would mean that
nothing actually will be progressed.
Do you see that as being a potential risk?
I guess I'll make a couple points. One is the cooperation will be delivered by the
Bioscience Economy Institute, who do this work around the world already.
They are already operating in India in applesSo they are the delivery partner.
It is funded by the New Zealand kiwifruit industry, but delivered by BSI, and it is
focused on Indian varieties and Indian growing conditions.
They're very different to New Zealand.
I would also make the point that, so we're not talking about the gold
varieties, not talking about the red varieties, and there are obviously core IP
issues which Zespri will protect.
But at the same time, there's a
global industry now.
And what goes into it, while there is a real opportunity to deliver value for
Indian growers, but it needs to be done in a way that works for Indian growers.
The climate is different, the soil types are different, the agronomy is
different. So BSI has a really strong track record, and we're confident
that we can deliver value to Indian growers, but we're also confident
that the deal is set up in such a way that it also protects New Zealand growers and
supports New Zealand growers.
Thank you. Next question,
Honorable Damien O'Connor.
Look, thank you very much. I want to be consistent here, and I made the point to
Dairy NZ or DCANZ. You are arguably the
biggest beneficiary of this direct deal.
Not showing up in person is a little bit insulting to Parliament.
This is the first opportunity that the Parliament has to scrutinize this.
There's a lot of debate, and so there's legislation yet
to be heard. So I suggest you take that on board later.
Can I just ask one other thing?
Sure.
There's a huge commitment to invest.
You're one of the biggest players, potentially.
Mm-hmm.
How much do you think that you will invest in the Indian
market in the next
10 years?
Mm-hmm. Sure. Well, firstly, acknowledge your point, fair
point, and we
are significant beneficiaries of the deal and certainly dialing it is not meant to
be a show of disrespect or anything like that. So just acknowledge that point.
I can't give you a quantum, but we will invest significantly in the market.
So the kiwifruit cooperation itself is a significant investment over five
years. At the same time, we will invest in demand and
to build the market. So this is in a sales and marketing approach
in building and our team in India and in building awareness of kiwifruit.
And our model is different to some in that we don't own the infrastructure in
market. We won't own shops or build cold storage in market.
But what happens around the world is when Zespri can say, "This is our intention
for the market, this is how much fruit we will have over the next five, 10 years in
the market," then our supply chain partners invest.
So you can see it in China. So there's a significant investment in cold storage,
and
an infrastructure that enables the sales and marketing of New Zealand kiwifruit in
market. So while Zespri, under the regulations, can't invest in these sorts of
things in the market, we will invest in the sales and marketing, and our supply
chain partners will invest in delivering it.
Sorry to cut across because the Indians will be counting,
quantifying the level of investment, and there are people who are
asking, where will that investment come from, and how much will be from you?
Quantify that, if possible, please.
Yeah. Well, like I say, I can't give you an investment in our sales and marketing
approach, but we will invest. We are now going with the
FTA likely to be ratified this year, and hopefully the benefit's being delivered
next year. That is from then on, we will start to invest in developing the
market, so we are working through what that looks like now.
To be clear, our regulations do not allow us to invest in
infrastructure or the like in market.
Our regulations mean that we will invest in sales and marketing and innovation.
We will invest in the kiwifruit action plan.
So there will be a quantum of investment in there, but I can't give you the number
today.
Thank you.
Thanks, Michael, really appreciate that.
As you say, some fantastic opportunities in here for Zespri, which is
encouraging, gives, as you say, one of the most comprehensive market
access outcomes. Who has better?
This is the best outcome for kiwifruit.
Oh, this is the best?
To this point. Exactly, yes.
Okay. Very good. Okay. You mentioned one of the most, so I thought, "Oh, have we
missed a trick there and someone's got better?" But it's encouraging to hear.
All right. Hey, thank you very much.
All the best for that, and thank you for your time today. Appreciate it.
Yes. Appreciate it.
Okay, we move now to New Zealand Forest Owners Association.
Who have turned up.
Welcome.
You are in.
Honorable.
We've got both.
Good dogs.
Wood processors and manufacturers association.
No, no, it's all good.
Both entities.
Thank you for coming.
Thank you very much. We've received and read your submission.
We'll hand over to you. You've got 10 minutes. Thank you.
Oh, good morning. Thanks for this opportunity.
It's great to be here in person to present our oral submission
on the New Zealand India Free Trade Agreement. Look, I'm Mark Ross.
I'm the chief executive of the Wood Process Manufacturing Association, and with
me is Dr. Elizabeth Hague from the Forest Owners Association.
Look, I'm going to talk a little bit about the wood processing side, and then I'll
pass on to Elizabeth to focus on the forest owner side.
So look, we're an industry association representing wood product
exporters to India, so it includes pulp, paper
board, and value added products. But we submit in strong support of a
New Zealand India Free Trade Agreement.
We think it's a great deal, and it'll provide an incentive to our industry
to export more and collaborate to build up the Indian market.
Removing tariffs 5.5% to 11% as
an incentive.
We expected to experience the largest increase of all exports, according
to supporting papers, of up to 487 million
by 2050.
So the softwood market in India is predicted in the next
10 years to increase to 1.8 billion.
Currently only export around 1.5,
150 million to India. At the moment, that market is dominated by
Canada, China, Australia, and Finland.
We have very little impact there, so we see great potential there.
India's moving to smart cities, housing for all, climate change,
50 million new homes, green buildings, reducing emissions, furniture and
pulp. So what India's seeing that they'll need wood in the future, they got
limited local supplyLook, this isn't all about tariffs.
Other parts of the agreement that reading through it will be really
beneficial to us. So, non-tariff barrier
criteria, we do get hit by non-tariff barriers when it comes
to getting product into the country, for example.
But things like the 48-hour clearance that's put into the agreement will be really
beneficial and will help incentivize us into the market.
The risk assessment criteria, which Elizabeth will talk more
about. But one of the key ones for us is around the forest
cooperation
article, which mentions building standards.
So, we can align our building standards with the Indian building standards when it
comes to structural timber, to building products.
It'll make a big difference in potentially selling to that
market. We do see it as a huge opportunity.
We're already receiving
Indian customers who are looking at doing deals with us.
So, they're already preempting that this free trade agreement is going to go
ahead. So look, we submit strongly in support of it, and the sooner it's
ratified, the better. Thank you. I'll pass to Elizabeth.
Kia ora, Martin. Kia ora. Thank you for hearing our submission today.
So, Forest Owners Association, I think many of you know, but we look after
commercial forest growers, and obviously work really closely with our partners in
the supply chain. But we do have a significant amount
of log exports to India.
One of the keys to ensuring that trade is around
phytosanitary.
Mm-hmm.
And one of the great things about this agreement is that,
I guess off the back of the FTA, we've been able to work together with the
Indian government in looking at alternatives to the current methyl bromide on
arrival, which is really good.
But also, I look after a research arm
in Rotorua, and we're already having meetings with Indian officials and
with some of the Indian businesses around the components of the agreement
that also speak to collaboration and partnership.
So, around science and research and our ability to look at
innovation and education with the Indian market.
And I think that's where some of that co-investment and investment is going to come
from, is from our R&D efforts in that space, which
are really positive. I was lucky enough to go to India for the
signing of the FTA, and the meetings I had with Indian businesses there,
they're really focused on decarbonizing their packaging and
their building systems. And they are looking at some of the work that we're doing
in things like the mass timber systems, like the building that
is being constructed here on the Parliament precinct.
And for them, that's not an area they've thought of moving their commercial
building into, but that they're really excited about.
That potential to have both buildings and packaging that are built
out of green materials is something that,
in the meetings that I had, they were really interested in understanding more
about.
That science-based collaboration is, the standards are going to be a really
important component of that. And so I think with any of
this work, it's going to be important that as private
industry, that the collaboration that we're doing is underpinned by the
public sector and the work that they're able to do government to government.
I guess the last thing I would say is, that active
cooperation, I think we were really pleasantly
surprised. I don't think it's necessarily the right word, but we've had a lot of
interest from India, which has been great.
And then our domestic growers are really excited about the opportunity as well.
So,
the tariff liberalization is a great aspect of the FTA,
but it's actually all the other components that go alongside it that are what's
going to make it work and what's going to help us to build that really vibrant
relationship end market.
Excellent. Great. Questions. First question is Tim Costley.
Hi. Thank you.
Nice to see you, though I don't mind if you want to save your emissions and Zoom in
next time, that's fine.
Can I just ask, I was really interested in the comment you made, I've been
saving all my questions for now, about building standards aligning
across. So can you just elaborate on that?
Because I didn't read much in the submission about that, but can you just expand
on what you-
Yeah. Sure. So, each country has its standards when they build buildings-
Sure
... whether it's houses or commercial buildings.
So our standards align with the Indian standards when it comes to structural
qualities of the timber, for example.
So if we can, we're doing it currently with our other
jurisdictions. If we can try to align our building standards, what
our timber represents in the way of
structure and
building, so we can align-
Are you talking about for individual products, or are you talking about, you
say we want to align our standards with theirs, or is it them
accepting our products? Is it our making sure that anything we export meets their
specifications? What are you-- Because we're not going to change, I don't think
you're suggesting we change how we build standard
No, we export pinus radiata softwood, and that might not-
Yeah
... be specified with an Indian standard to the point where we can actually
sell into the housing market, that they can be guaranteed that our
product will be structurally sound, will actually meet their
requirements. So-
So it's about our exported products meeting their standards.
Correct.
That's what you're saying.
It's not us changing any internal building standards.
And it's-
No, not at all. It's about meeting the Indian-
Yeah.
And it's about educating them about how softwood can be used, particularly
in their climate. So, for instance, the
tall timber buildings that I talked about, so like LVL, CLT, it's
just making sure that they're aware, that's a product that's manufactured and
treated, which means it's probably relatively easy for us to have that
meet standards. If we're going to have manufacturers that we're partnering with
in India, we need them, in order to get the most out of our product, to
understand the kind of treatments and manufacturing it needs to go through in
order to withstand humid and highly variable
climates.
And if I can, because obviously all that new parliament building
comes through my electorate and-
Yeah
... coming out of Levin. But we also have companies like Tiklam there-
Sure
... who built some amazing structures.
I'm sure you're familiar with themWhat's the opportunity for New Zealand in
this? Is it exporting the raw materials to the equivalent of a
Teak Lamb in India, or do we get some more
value add on the way out the door?
So, it's both.
Yeah.
I think the conversations that we've had, so obviously I'm
more at the log end of the spectrum, Mark's more at the manufacturing end.
Sure.
But we've got interest in India from people who want to build
manufacturing or build on their current manufacturing business.
We've also got interest in, can they help us
establish manufacturing here-
Mm
... to get product to a certain level that then they do refined
manufacturing in India.
Right.
So when I say partnership, it's really the whole
gamut of approaches that we've had in terms of how we would build those supply
chains.
Okay. Vanusha Walters.
Thank you. Exciting times in the industry for you.
I was just curious whether, in the short term, there'll be a need to redirect
capacity to kind of create some energy in the relationship
and build it, which might create issues for you in
terms of that short-term capacity.
In the way that our capacity at the moment, we do have
processing capability within New Zealand, so we're not going to be impacted there.
But what we really want to do is collaborate and work together right across the
supply chain to make
sure we get the best out of this free trade agreement.
So, I don't see that being a problem.
Strategically-wise, we're looking long term, so we're not going to be rushing this.
Yeah. And I think within the associations, we're
working collaboratively with the companies in New Zealand and with
Te Uru Rākau and MPI and MFAT on how we can realize the
opportunity. So, if you're asking
are we probably going to have to lean into some of the
companies we've got right now that are having some fuel crisis issues and that-
Mm
... yeah, those companies have been giving us a lot of their time and attention on
this, which is great, and spending some time in market.
What I would say is those
companies see this as a long-term play.
Yeah.
So
certainly we've got a lot of short-term pressures that are putting a lot of
pressure on the industry.
Oh.
But that doesn't mean we shouldn't take the long-term opportunity to build a
partnership that's going to help us add value overall to what right
now are probably more commodity products.
Mm-hmm.
And what we're hearing from the Indian market is that they're interested in helping
us add value to those. So that's a growth opportunity that we're all
really keen to take advantage of, despite what the kind of tensions of the day
might be.
Okay.
All right. Dr. Huang Chunying.
Thank you. I'll be quick. This is on NTBs.
Your submission on NTBs for me was the most memorable when I asked to use that
example. How long do you think the NTBs
will take to kind of work through? Is it immediate?
And in your submission before, you talk about the significant drop because
of the NTB with phytosanitary requirements from 2019 to 2023.
How long do you see it bounce back to the 300
million export that we had pre-2019?
Yeah. Well, I want to be clear.
The phytosanitary issues, part of that was because of our own kind of
domestic targets.
Mm-hmm.
So
I don't know that I would wholly classify that as an NTB, but certainly-
Thank you. Yeah
... yeah. But I think
in terms of how fast the trade could bounce back,
the supply chain issues right now, and I guess going
back to the previous question are probably making some of the
trade growth slower than we would've anticipated.
Okay.
That being said, I think the supply lines are starting to kind of
reorganize themselves in a way that we could realize growth quite quickly.
And some of the projected growth is,
the projections move around a lot in the current environment, which is dynamic,
but I would say we could see hundreds of millions of dollars in additional trade
over the coming two to three years.
So that's quite a substantive opportunity.
That being said, I think in terms of the wider
reduction in NTBs, what we're really keen to focus on is,
I guess, how we work together just to make the trade relationship as
transparent and open as possible.
And that's where the standards and some of these other things that
Mark talked about are going to be really critical.
Is there anything you want to say on that?
Yeah.
No, this is going to be a process, and we've got that in place now, how we can
actually talk to each other about NTBs.
We've been going on them for a long time, and I think with this free trade
agreement, we actually have a process we can get to an agreement,
and that's what we're after.
Okay. Quick, start from-
Just as a supplementary-
Yeah, go on
... there's no dispute resolution or no dispute
systems for SPS.
Given that you were in the firing line of that over methyl bromide, are you
concerned that they could impose some other restriction, you'd have nowhere
to go?
I have confidence in our biosecurity systems and our ability to work
through SPS issues. So I would
say a cautious yes. There's always going to be some exterior
case that I won't have thought of. But for the most part, we've got really positive
discussions with the Indian government, and I
back New Zealand's capability and frankly our industry's capability in that space
to be able to work through whatever comes up.
All right. Thank you both very much. Appreciate your time this morning.
Thank you.
Okay, we move now to Democracy Action
Incorporated for their submission.
They're online.
Okay.
Good morning, Chair and committee members.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
No problem. We have you down for 10 minutes, so I'll let you get straight into it.
Thank you. My name is Lee Short. I'm appearing for Democracy Action.
We're a nonpartisan group of New Zealand citizens founded in
2012, and we're concerned about the erosion of democratic
equality and the principle of one person, one vote regardless of
ancestry. We support the free trade that benefits all New
Zealanders. However, we do not support using trade
agreements to advance contentious constitutional
change.We are deeply concerned about the constitutional
implications of the UNDRIP clause in the India Free Trade Agreement,
and strongly urge the committee to recommend that Article 13.2 be
removed before the agreement is ratified.
This clause, which expressly affirms the United Nations declaration on
the rights of indigenous peoples, UNDRIP,
is unrelated to the agreement's trade objectives and has no place in
a trade treaty.
Article 13.2 does nothing to reduce the tariffs,
improve market access,
streamline customs procedures, protect investments, or
increase the exports to India. Its only purpose
appears ideological.
Trade agreements should be about commerce between nations, not as a vehicle
to stealthily rewrite domestic constitutional
understandings.
India made this point crystal clear.
They only agreed to the clause with an explicit reservation, and I quote,
"For India, indigenous peoples is without prejudice to
India's domestic legal classification, and any
recognition of indigenous status shall be in accordance with India's law
and policy."
New Zealand makes no such reservations.
So we have left our parliament, our courts, and our democratic processes
exposed.
We are told that this clause has no legal effect,
but that overlooks the reality that international commitments are often used
by courts, tribunals, officials, and policymakers
as interpretive tools.
Once UNDRIP is affirmed in a treaty, it becomes harder for future
governments to distance themselves from policies associated with it.
Ratifying this agreement opens the possibility that lawyers and judges
could later argue that Parliament and the government have
expressly endorsed the principles of UNDRIP, and those principles should
therefore help shape the development of New Zealand law and public policy.
This concern is not hypothetical.
UNDRIP became the foundation for He Purapura, the report commissioned
by the Ardern government in 2019.
He Purapura set out a roadmap for extensive constitutional
transformation, including forms of co-governance and
separate governance arrangements based on ancestry.
For many New Zealanders, this demonstrates that UNDRIP is not merely an
abstract international declaration.
It's already being used to domestically support major constitutional
change.
We contend that New Zealand's original objectives were right.
When UNDRIP was adopted in 2007 by the UN General
Assembly, New Zealand voted against it.
Our then permanent representative to the United Nations, Rosemary Banks,
warned that key provisions were incompatible with our constitutional
arrangements.
She highlighted risks around, one, ownership and control of
lands and resources,
and redress and compensation,
and effective veto powers over our democratic decisions.
She rightly said these ideas risk creating different classes of
citizenship and undermining equal democratic
participation.
These concerns are not marginal. They go to the heart of who we are as a
liberal democracy.
New Zealand formally endorsed UNDRIP in 2010, but the fundamental
constitutional problems had never been resolved through open public
debate or electoral consent.
Now we see this is slipping into contested declaration into a binding
treaty.
It's very reasonable to ask why this wording has been included in the trade
agreement at all.
Where did it get in there? Who put it in there?
There is concern that the clause was inserted to advance domestic political
projects under cover of a trade policy.
Parliament has effectively been asked to approve a trade treaty
carrying significant constitutional implications that have never been
openly or honestly put before the public.
This wording used in this agreement also marks a significant
departure from previous trade agreements.
The UK-New Zealand and the EU-New Zealand agreements
merely noted that our parties held positions regarding UNDRIP.
That is a very neutral language. It acknowledges the
declaration's existence without endorsing it.
By contrast, the India-New Zealand agreement affirms New Zealand's
commitment to UNDRIP.
Affirming signals approval of and political commitment to
the principles contained within the declaration.
That is materially different for a much stronger form of
wording. Minister McClay
attempted to reassure the public that there is no cause for concern.
However, in doing so, he glosses over the practical reality that once
UNDRIP is affirmed in an international treaty,
courts may use it to guide the interpretation of domestic law and policy.
Thank you.
If the government genuinely believes the clause carries no constitutional
significance, then the obvious solution is to remove it or
amend it now before ratification.
Under Article 18 of the Vienna Convention.
Are we all right?
Yes.
Under Article 18 of the Vienna Convention of the Law of Treaties, amendments can be
made between the signing and the ratification,
provided they do not undermine the treaty's object and purposes.
This type of clarification process, commonly referred to as legal
scrubbing, is well established in international treaty
practice.There also appears to be little
reason to believe that India would object.
The clause is irrelevant to the agreement's trade objectives, and
removing it or amending it would not affect the treaty's substance.
In fact, India itself entered a reservation making it
clear that the UNDRIP provision does not apply to it,
which further underlines how irrelevant this clause is in the agreement
itself.
We therefore ask the committee to recommend the removal of
Article 13.2, affirming UNDRIP from this agreement before
ratification proceeds,
and also recommend a broader review of the practice of inserting political
and constitutional commitments unrelated to trade into free
trade agreements.
And we also urge the government to show courage and hold a genuine public debate,
and ultimately a referendum on the place of UNDRIP in New Zealand's
constitutional arrangements,
and the principle of equal citizenship.
In our opinion, trade agreements should unite New Zealanders around shared
prosperity.
They should not divide us by ancestry.
Democracy Action supports stronger trade ties with India.
We do not, however, support undermining the democratic
principle that all citizens are equal before the law.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you very much for your time this morning, Mr Short.
Appreciate that.
Okay, we will move now to Andrew
Ralph.
Online, thank you.
Right. Oh, he's beaming in from a long way away.
Welcome this morning, Mr. Ralph. We've received your submission.
We have five minutes sit down, and I'll hand over to you.
Great, thank you. Good morning. My name is Andy Ralph.
I'm speaking on my own behalf.
The question of the New Zealand and Indian free trade agreement, to
me, is somewhat problematical. New Zealand is a country that has, for
generations, provided food for its inhabitants, with some left over to
export to other countries. In more recent years, other countries have seen New
Zealand as a provider of high-quality, cheap produce.
Some countries are able to purchase New Zealand products,
especially butter and other dairy products, at prices below that
which our own people can buy them.
We know that there are companies from other countries which are buying up New
Zealand companies for their own benefit and often at a loss to our country.
We have seen where some of our most respected brands have been sold off and
production has been moved to other countries.
This is New Zealand's loss. In a similar vein, the free trade agreement
with India will bring about greater losses to New Zealanders as whole
industries, not just companies, are transferred to India.
This will enable India to produce products that will be in direct competition with
companies here in New Zealand within a worldwide market with greater
access to some markets. Along with that, we will be sending some of our most
qualified horticulturalists to train them on how to take over our
profitable industries.
The reason so many companies want to move their operations overseas,
obviously, is that labor costs are lower.
Once again, it will be New Zealand industry that will suffer.
Not only that, but there will be fewer work opportunities for average workers in
our country. It is about land, family farms, rural communities,
food freedom, and whether or not real Kiwis' produce still has a
future in New Zealand.
It's about women working to support their husbands and provide for their children,
who could well now lose those opportunities.
Shouldn't we support laws that defend real farmers from the ravages of greedy
foreign investments when we have not even shown whether or not there will be real
benefits for common Kiwis through this trade agreement?
New Zealand farmers have fed this country for generations, and they should not be
pushed aside by systems controlled by wealthy tech interests in other
countries. This is bigger than one product, and more than likely will
spread to other products and industries.
Are we selling our soul at the cost of New Zealanders who've spent their whole
lives building up their businesses to benefit our own people and this
amazing country? Are we selling the future of our children and our
children's children through generations to come?
Indians have the right to work, and having been to India, I know there are many
people there who work very hard. However, India has large
populations and huge need for their own products, and many
low-income Indians will not get to eat the produce that
will be provided by our lost industries.
I'm sure that some of our industries will benefit from this agreement, but many
average New Zealanders will not.
Is this government willing to risk its standing in the community by selling the
country out from underneath us, especially as there is an election on
the horizon? We will see a drop in employment and lower
wages. This will lead to lowered ability to afford new homes, which
will lead to less building, which in turn will lead to less income.
With less building comes less bank lending and therefore less land sales, which
leads to less rates, which will lead to lowered council income.
Along with lowered wages will come less taxes, which will mean less
government income and less spending by the government on some of the major
funding needs,
education, hospitals, critical infrastructure.
Years ago, I remember hearing about a banana republic, so I researched it.
It turns out that in political science, the term banana
republic describes a politically and economically unstable
country with an economy dependent on the export of its natural
resources. Is this where we're heading?
If so, New Zealand will become a laughing stock and the butt of the jokes of many
countries and peoples.I'm sure that none of us want to see our
beloved country from that perspective.
Are we, as a nation, fitting into the current worldwide
agenda to overthrow national sovereignties?
There are-
We've run out of time, unfortunately, Mr Ralph.
Okay.
Thank you very much for your contribution this morning. Appreciate it.
Okay, we move now to Azian Zulkiflee.
Online.
I thought the name Ralph was a clothing brand.
Good morning.
Good morning. Good morning, Mr. Chair, and thank you for the opportunity to appear
before this committee.
No problem. We have five minutes set down for today.
I'll hand straight over to you. Cheers.
Thank you. My name is Azian Zulkiflee, and I am submitting in
opposition to the New Zealand India Free Trade Agreement.
While I support international trade and positive relationships between
nations, I believe this agreement raises serious concerns
around reciprocity, sovereignty, and New Zealand's long-term
strategic interests.
Due to time constraints, I will not focus on the immigration and labor mobility
aspects of the agreement, although these also raise concerns that
deserve careful public discussion.
My first concern relates to provisions requiring New Zealand to assist in
developing India's horticultural capability, including orchard
systems, post-harvest handling, production knowledge, and
regulatory frameworks connected to high-value plant varieties.
New Zealand has spent decades building strong industries and expertise in these
areas. Yet in exchange for limited and conditional market access,
we appear to be helping establish future competition in sectors where
we currently hold a significant advantage.
More concerning still is that some concessions granted to New Zealand
are tied to ongoing cooperation obligations.
This means New Zealand is expected to actively assist India's industry
development while the market access we receive remains conditional
and potentially reversible.
Secondly, my other concern is the inclusion of references to
broader international frameworks, such as UNDRIP and the Paris Climate
Agreement, within a bilateral trade agreement.
Regardless of people's views on these frameworks, trade agreements should remain
focused primarily on trade and commerce.
Constitutional matters, climate policy, and questions of national
direction should remain within New Zealand's democratic processes and
not become embedded within international trade agreements.
And finally, I question whether this agreement is genuinely balanced in New
Zealand's favor.
At a time when many New Zealanders are struggling and our infrastructure is
under serious strain, committing significant long-term
investment into India does not appear to reflect New Zealand's
immediate national interests or needs.
And while New Zealand appears to have granted India broad market access, many
of our own key export sectors, in particular dairy,
remain heavily restricted or excluded altogether.
I therefore urge this committee to carefully consider whether the long-term
concessions New Zealand is making under this arrangement are truly
proportionate to the benefits we are receiving in return.
Thank you for your time, and I welcome any questions from the committee.
Excellent. Do we have questions for Azian?
All right. Looks like you've done a very good job explaining your submission.
Thank you very much for your time this morning.
Thank you.
Okay, we come now to the Manuel Pou
Family Ghana Trust.
Kia ora.
Good morning.
Excellent. We have got your submission here.
Hopefully, you've seen how the process works.
We have 10 minutes set down for you this morning. Over to you.
Okay, thank you. Matua tama, waru a tapu, me ana here pono, me
te mangai. Whakapeka ihoratou i te rangimarie. Amene.
Heavenly Father, thank you for everything we have and everything we're about to
receive. In Jesus name, amen.
Amen.
Tena tatou katoa. Kia ora. Ko Frances Pou toku ingoa.
I am the chairman of the Manuel Pou Family Whanau Trust.
I have been requested to state the following.
This is a notification request under urgency.
The Manuel Pou Family Whanau Trust demand on request under
urgency, a cease and desist into the FTA
agreement, an international internal independent
investigation, and a release of all private official financial
information pertaining to the FTA agreement between
New Zealand Government and the Government Republic of India.
This is against the New Zealand coalition government, which has
intentionally, deliberately breached international
treaties concerning Te Tiriti o Waitangi, and
failing to comply to the obligations, responsibilities to the laws,
legislative duties under the act sections of these laws.
These are our reasons: political instability,
legal and constitutional challenges, widespread
civil unrest, severe domestic unrest,
international scrutiny, oppression, suppression, and
persecution against Maori customs, traditions, knowledge,
belief, and cooperation. Today, New Zealand
citizens, Maori, all who reside in New Zealand
are facing crisis of economic financial
hardship. Highest rate in
unemployment. Today, 900 jobs are
being cut. Homelessness, business
liquidations, rising cost in food, rent,
power, water, gas, causing severe civil
and domestic unrest to low-income and middle-income
families forced into
poverty.Violation of rights.
The sect breach. Corporate registration.
The New Zealand government is registered under foreign
government with the US Securities and
Exchange Commission.
Under private corporate entities, the New Zealand
Coalition has intentionally moved from the public
service government to a private corporate entity,
no longer acting as a sovereign protector but as
a commercial entity, making its laws for
corporate policies. The Prime Minister, Christopher
Luxon, states, "The government will continue rewriting
treaty clauses across legislation
despite the Waitangi Tribunal warning law
reform, a major breach of the Treaty of
Waitangi." The coalition government, within three
years, has systematically overhauled legislation
to minimize the legal influence of Te Tiriti o
Waitangi and diminish customary Maori rights
as specific protection for Maori customs, beliefs,
traditions, and rights.
Sorry, Frances, did you have any further comments in relation to the
FTA?
Yes. The coalition government has advanced plans to
review, erase, and weaken the legal references to the treaty
principles across 28 distinct pieces of legislation
affecting areas such as conservation, housing, child
well-being.
Concerning the FTA with the government republic
on India, in promoting investment into
India, increasing private sector investments
by $20 billion over 15 years, is this for the
private sector only?
Does India already have an FTA with New
Zealand?
Has the Minister of Foreign Affairs Defense at the Trade Committee
deliberately intentionally importing genetically
modified food,
breaching international food, health, and safety standards
for New Zealand consumers, putting all who reside in New
Zealand's health at risk?
Has the food that has been imported internationally to
New Zealand kept the food and safety laws of New
Zealand standards concerning the FTA
agreements with New Zealand
concerning international treaties?
Have you consulted with the New Zealand citizens and the
Maori?
Can I ask a question?
Yes.
So it's been really interesting
as we've had a number of different submitters come in,
talk about this sort of historic free trade
agreement that
the Prime Minister and Minister Tom McClay have negotiated with India in sort of
record time. And
we've heard today from Zespri Kiwi fruit
talking about this being the best deal in the world.
But one of the last ones we had was about the Forest
Owners Association, I think they were called, and talking about the
ways that New Zealand timber could be used over there,
talking about exports of soft timber, but also some of the
new technology where they sort of laminate this together and they send it
overseas,
and buildings are sort of as strong as concrete and steel these days.
It's quite amazing. But as you speak about, and I read in your submission,
you mentioned things like manuka honey.
But just as you speak now, I was thinking about maybe some of our,
in the past, it's been native forestry, but there are some great
initiatives owned by Iwi around the
country, and I've been to visit some of them.
They export and might benefit from this, and
I've been to visit them in Whakatane.
I've been to visit them in Porirua.
And I just wondered,
what do you think would be the impact here?
Whether it was maybe Iwi owned forestry that had the opportunity to
export into this growing Indian market, or
whether it was some of our other
exports. I just wondered if you had a view
on those people that are saying, "Hey, this is a really good deal." Do you
see some of the positives there, or what would be your
perspective on that, ma'am?
My
perspective is on international treaty
laws and how
the
Foreign Trade Committee is dealing with
the food being imported into New Zealand
that is genetically modified. Now, yeah, it might be good for
the bigger businesses and corporations, but what I'm
stating is that today, Maori are
facing the highest oppression, persecution, and
suppression that we have from this government in the last three years,
which is wiping out our rights in
international law, which goes right back to the New
Zealand independence of the declaration,
which is 1835. And our trade-
Yeah. That was-
Our trade is with 60 countries
Is it 1835?
Our trade is with 60 countries worldwide, international
trade.
Yeah. It's really important.
And it goes right back to 1835. And when you look into the
records and you look into the history of international
trade, Maori are the ones that have that trade.
Yeah, they've done great with trade.
Yeah.
Okay, that brings us to the end of our time for this morning.
Thank you for your insights.
Thank you.
Okay, we move now to Miriana Rifa
We don't seem to be able to get them as, um-
She's not here. Okay. We will move instead to
Natalie Stimmy.
Good morning, Natalie.
Hi.
Excellent.
Hopefully, you've seen how it works.
We have five minutes set down for you, and we've received your submission.
We'll hand straight over to you. Thank you.
Okay. So thank you. I
don't believe that this will be beneficial for New Zealand, this FTA.
Firstly, while it's called a free trade agreement, it will not be free.
It will only increase the GDP
by a minimal amount. It looks like about, at best, sort of
$400 million over one year. To put that in perspective,
National adds about $500 million to our national debt every
fortnight.
It also includes an agreement that $20 billion will be spent in private
investment commitment into India over 15 years.
India has the sole discretion to decide whether or
not we've complied with that. That's a very big risk.
There's nothing to suggest that we can trust
India to make a very fair judgment on that point.
Secondly, it will drain jobs out of New Zealand.
It will encourage New Zealand-owned businesses to seek manufacturing options in
India rather than New Zealand, as they seek cheaper wages.
This will drain the employment market at a time when it's already heavily
threatened by the advent of AI. My 16-year-old daughter
has spent the last 10 months looking for part-time work and has not found anything.
The competition out there is really high.
And we're already facing massive unemployment problems, and
pushing manufacturing out of the country and overseas is just going to exacerbate
it.
Thirdly, it'll open up floodgates on immigration options.
We have dropped the ability to cap the access to student
visas and specialist visas. That means
virtually an unlimited number of students and employees being able to move
to New Zealand.
A similar thing happened in the UK where they had local companies would lay off
local staff in order to hire people from India, and it was becoming a problem.
It was shut down in 2021.
However, in this FTA, New Zealand will not have the ability to shut
that down as part of the agreement.
Any large groups moving, immigrating,
in a short period of time can lead to problems, tensions, because
the culture that's
incumbent is, they fail to assimilate
if it's done too quickly. And that can cause all sorts of other problems,
social fragmentation, economic disparities at risk.
Fourthly, this agreement doesn't even include
some of our huge
industries.
The industries that it does include are not our biggest industries.
And
even if it did, it would only really benefit the people at the top of those
industries. There's nothing to suggest it will trickle
down in any meaningful way to the average
Kiwi.
Fifth, this FTA includes a requirement where we're going to hand
over intellectual property on how to grow those products
that we want to export to them, so that's sort of a little bit
just
ridiculous, if you ask me. It'll wipe out any benefit
that we've gained from the increase in the GDP.
Not only that, but we'll see an increase on cheap product being imported.
And what will happen is that the goods in New Zealand will
be, so only the wealthy will be able to afford
the high export prices of the goods that we're exporting,
and we'll end up having the rest of the country will be left with the cheap
imports. And sixth, I would like to say that FTA
includes several parts to it that are controversial.
UNDRIP, the Paris Accord, and the CBDC have all been snuck into the agreement
without any public consultation.
And to me, it seems as if it's been
ramrodded through and
it's not the way a true
democracy should operate.
I'd just like to add that New Zealand leaders have a duty of care to the people of
New Zealand. Decisions that they make should benefit New Zealand as a
whole, not just the few executives at the top of their industries.
The fair trade agreement that has been signed does not benefit everybody and
it may increase the wealth of a few, but at the cost of the rest of the nation.
And in my opinion, it's actually treasonous.
That's all I have to say.
All right.
Thank you very much.
Okay. Appreciate your time. Cheers.
Right. We move to Peter Buchanan.
So Peter Buchanan, we need you to accept the invitation to come in
to submit.
Still just needs to click the-
Yeah. Should be able to right click.
Good morning.
Morning, Mr. Buchanan.
Kia ora.
We have received your submission. We have five minutes set down for you today.
I'll hand straight over to you. Thank you.
Just a comment, you must be fast-tracking this process because of the
budget coming this afternoon.
Well, we're hearing some today, and more submitters next week.
Oh, is that right? Okay. It should be interesting anyway.
Look, kia ora.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before this committee,
which is about the free trade agreement
between New Zealand and India. And
I think it's good.
The bones are good, the principles are good, and
hopefully will deliver a longstanding, enduring relationship or
partnership which will benefit both countries.
My submission, basically two components.
First component was about the Treaty of Waitangi.
And I've heard Francis
make comments about that, so rather to
repeat those,
I think that
there's been just significant erosion
in the partnership between the treaty partners.
So I'll
leave that, it'll leave you years time to de-tune.
And
the second component, which is
about
essentially opposing a tariff of
up to 5%, or at least 5% of exported
items from New Zealand to India. In fact, that
could be
applied to other trade agreements in the future,
or even existing ones.
I also took the opportunity to listen to
a number of the other submitters and
Zespri, for example, which is quite an international
exporter, and
his comments were that they currently pay 33%
import duty of kiwifruit to India.
And he again alluded to the partnership component was
important, including
the supply chain, et cetera. And supply chain
really includes our
infrastructure, and we've obviously got
a huge deficit in the
infrastructure,
which
has snip impacts on partnerships at the moment.
We've got a reputation to protect that we are
going to be a reliable producer, supplier of our
goods to
partners such as India.
And also, we will be hosting quite a significant increase
number, I expect, of their citizens in New Zealand.
For example, they'll be attending our universities,
providing income for universities.
We also expect to be
hosting them with our other infrastructure, such as
hospitals and
education schools. And again, infrastructure
is a component which resonates that there's a deficit
there.
And an export
tariff would
be
a timely
tool
to provide
that
infrastructure
in a timely manner so that we can host
their citizens or citizens of other countries and the
standard which they expect. So they're coming to our
house, for example. So this is going just to put
my emphasis about knowing that the
tariff,
which is
also utilized by other countries
such as Russia, Indonesia,
but not so much by a lot of other
countries yet. And there's no reason why New Zealand
cannot. We've always been an innovative country, and
solutions,
we've got
to our ever dynamic geopolitical situation
where there's been disruptions in supply
chains
that we need to think outside
the square and look at what we can do to
lift the standard of living in New Zealand to what it was
before.
So
we need to
have a reputation as an exporter.
Is
important. India has a
pretty large
population and what's the population of India, by the way?
Is it 3 billion?
Sorry. The population is about 1.4, just over one.
1.4. So that's quite sizable. So it's-
A bit bigger than us, yes.
So while having a tariff model,
there's no cost to the New Zealand producer.
There's no cost to India.
So really it's cost neutral and it's enormous benefit
that would enable us to
invest in infrastructure, also climate adaptation
Excellent. Sorry, Mr McKenna, we're
over time there, but appreciate your insights and your suggestion in relation to
the tariff.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for taking your time this morning to contribute. Appreciate it.
Good luck with the budget.
Thank you. Okay. We move now to Solomon Matthews.
He's online. Excellent.
Good morning. Mr Chair-
Good morning, Mr Matthews.
Yeah.
You, I'm sure you have seen how it works.
We'll hand straight over to you for your five minutes. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr Chair, members of the committee, thank you.
I'm an Auckland IT consultant making this submission in a personal capacity.
I have no commercial interest in the outcome.
I support the goods access under the agreement.
My concerns concentrate on one point.
The public discussion has focused on the 5,000 T concurrent cap.
That's the bounded part of the agreement.
The Annex 8K concerns are uncapped. Categories, sorry, are uncapped.
The Article VIII34A of the treaty does not
merely leave them uncapped, it prohibits New Zealand from adopting caps
on them.
The national interest analysis does not quantify the expected inflow under those
pathways.
Parliament is being asked to authorize binding commitments without a quantitative
anchor for the volume of
mobility
involved.
My submission makes six recommendations to address this through reporting,
written MFAT advice,
and published operational protocol from MBIE and Immigration New Zealand.
I welcome any questions about this.
Excellent. Questions for Mr Matthews?
Thank you for raising this because it's not an issue that's come up from other
submitters so far in terms of the annual reporting
piece.
So obviously, you're proposing MBIE conduct that
reporting in terms of the visa numbers.
Can you just expand a bit on, I think you'd mentioned somewhere around
the
visa access via
professionals,
managers, executives, et cetera.
How would you see that being measured?
Yes. So roughly speaking, it's the
transfer for companies between India and Australia for employees,
and my view on this from having read the
documents is that there's no quantification of
the expected amount of flows from that pathway.
And there's not only no cap, but there is no ability to bound it.
In terms of how it should be measured, I think that's an open question.
You probably would need some economic modeling and looking at comparable flows
from other New Zealand treaties. So perhaps, UK would be an interesting example
there too.
Mm.
Very good. All right. Any other questions?
Thank you very much for coming in and joining us this morning, Mr Matthews.
Appreciate your in-depth submission on that.
Thank you.
Cheers.
Okay, we come now to New Zealand Winegrowers.
Nice to have you here.
Great to be here.
Gold star.
Thank you, sir.
On the roll, Conor. You're experienced in how this works.
We've got your submission. We'll hand straight over to you for your 10 minutes.
Thanks very much, Mr Chair. My name's Philip Gregan, CEO
of New Zealand Winegrowers, and I have with me Sarah Wilson, our General
Manager Advocacy. I'll just make a couple of very brief comments and
I'll
hand over to Sarah. So my very
brief comments are that we export virtually
no wine to India at all at the moment.
I think it's a grand total of about $150,000 a
year. That's directly related to the
tariffs which we face, which are 150%.
And
we've worked very closely with
MFAT during the course of the
negotiations, and we are
supportive of the
agreement.
And on that, I'll hand over to Sarah, noting she'll make
some specific comments about the MFN provisions and
the annex.
Sarah.
Thank you. So the tariffs for wine currently sit at
150%, so that is a direct contributor to the scale of the market,
as Philip has mentioned.
What the agreement offers is tariff reductions on wines based on their
cost, insurance, and freight value, but essentially reduces those tariffs for
most wines to 25 or 50%. So that is a substantial
reduction.
Mm.
In addition, there is a significant benefit to the
sector from the side letter, which grants most favored nation status
for wine, and the EU-India FTA has been
negotiated in the meantime, provided our FTA enters into force
first, emphasizing the need for speed with this process.
That side letter means we'll receive the same tariff benefits as the European
Union. And while the benefits in our agreement are substantial, that
would further reduce the tariffs, reduce them more quickly, and reduce them on a
broader category of wines. So we would certainly
welcome entry into force as soon as possible to make maximum use of that
MFN letter.In a wine context,
non-tariff measures can be just as significant as tariffs themselves.
And so I just want to very briefly mention the wine annex, or specifically
to wine, whiskey, and distilled spirits.
That annex deals with some matters, but also creates a
working group for an ongoing partnership and ongoing discussions about
matters related to things like labeling and wine-making practices that can add
additional cost, and restrictions for traders looking to access the
Indian market. But we also think that there's an opportunity for building
mutually beneficial relationships with India, who have their own growing wine
industry as well. So we think that sets a really positive approach for the
future. Just lastly, I just want to acknowledge the work of
the many people involved in this agreement.
We know that it was a complicated process, and we just want to acknowledge
those in the government and those officials who've worked very hard to deliver this
result. Thank you, and I'm happy to take questions.
Thanks, Sarah.
Excellent.
And just one final comment from me.
As a follow-up, because of that, and an indication of our
interest in the market,
at our wine business forum at the end of August, we are bringing the one and
only
Indian master of wine, Sunil Holland, to New Zealand to talk to
the industry. And we know there's a lot of interest
in that event and
her attendance. So, we intend to follow up very strongly
on the basis that the deal has been done.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Excellent. Thank you for that. First question, Dr Lawrence Yuen.
Thank you, Chair. What we didn't hear from that is, are we invited?
But
thank you for coming.
Now, for wine growers, this may not be the most significant
in terms of numerical numbers, but it is most significant in terms of
entry into the market. But at the same time, the reduction in tariffs is
most potentially challenged by what is Article 9 in terms of the
investment. So,
in there it talks about how India could revert some of the
tariffs if we don't put in the kind of investment.
So this is a question that the Honorable O'Connor asked previously to Zespri, is,
in that case,
because there's a lot of things on the line, how much are the wine
growers expected to invest in India,
and whether
that can be quantifiable?
Simple answer is no.
It's not quantifiable, and the key thing about
New Zealand wine is it's produced in New Zealand.
So actually, the range of outward investment
we would likely see from New Zealand into production in India
is likely to be extremely limited.
Having said that,
what our wineries do is, a number of
them invest in distribution and their own sales
teams in market. So that would be
Indian people working for
New Zealand wineries.
But at the end of the day,
we're
an organization with 700 wineries, and
the decision about what they do is up to
each of them individually. We'll certainly be encouraging them to take
notice of what the
government has agreed to, and
if the government does promotional activities promoting
investment into India, we'll be certainly passing that on to
our members.
But I suppose part of the answer is there are risks
associated with any investment, and that's
one of the risks that people have to think about in terms of
investing in India.
Thank you. Next question, Vanushi Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for your submission.
I wonder if you could speak to the self-certification
issue and this agreement compared to others, and whether you have
any sense of
the genesis of that issue on the Indian end.
I'll let Sarah speak to that.
I guess to answer the second point first, I'm not sure of the genesis of the issue
from the Indian side. What we've seen in some recent trade agreements is this
ability for producers to self-certify so they're able to,
granted with some guidance, because it's quite a technical document, they're able
to fill in the documentation that confirms their wine is a New Zealand
product and provide that to their importers, their customers, to
customs, whoever may require it.
What the agreement currently includes is a requirement for that to be completed by
an approved exporter. And there is the possibility of
future producer self-certification in there.
But what we hear from members is that it's been really useful for them to be able
to complete the documentation themselves.
It's more cost-effective. It's quicker for them to do that.
And what we've seen with agreements like CPTPP is we've been able to work with
officials and agencies like customs to make sure that we're giving out the
right technical guidance for wine as a specific product, and then
the wineries can take that away and just manage it all themselves.
Thank you.
Next question, Honorable Danny O'Connor.
Look, two questions. One,
progress of the EU trade agreement, and so the
timelines for that versus the timelines for
our trade agreement. Have you worked out, given the importance of it?
No, I did have a
brief discussion with the
EU ambassador, Laurence Meredith, and said we're
delighted to see the EU agreement with India-
It clearly takes time
in the EU.
I don't know if you have any updates from your recent overseas trips, Sarah?
I asked this exact question to a representative from the European Commission
at a recent overseas conference I attended.
They weren't able to give any definitive timelines, but they pointed to the recent
entry into force of their Mercosur agreement as indication of perhaps the
expected timeframe, and I think that did take a little bit longer, so.
That took 20 years or so. Are you expecting this one to take that long?
We certainly hope not, but no, I think that was more from sort of entry into force
once it was all agreed in substance, was their comment.
Can I come back to the other thing around
certification? How are you going to prevent
valuable New Zealand wine being mixed with low-quality
Australian wine
if you have self-certification processes?
Because this has occurred in the UK, in fact, isn't it, with our wine.
So each country has requirements around labeling of
wine where it is a blend
between
a multi-country blend.
So,
the
New Zealand GI law, and tell me if I'm wrong,
Sarah, which I'm sure she'll do, is to put
Marlborough or Central Otago on a label, the wine
must be 100% from
New Zealand.
But if it's on a container or, dare I say,
bulk export to India as you do to many other places,
how do you ensure the credibility and the integrity of that?
In the Indian market.
Correct.
So, I suppose there's two parts to the answer to that.
If they're taking New Zealand wine, blending it into Indian
wine, and it's labeled as Indian wine, effectively the New Zealand
component has disappeared. So,
really that wouldn't be much of a concern.
But if they're taking New Zealand wine, blending
Indian
wine into it,
and it then bears a New Zealand geographic indication,
Marlborough or Central Otago, absolutely that would be of concern to
us.
Our approach to that would be to raise that with MFAT, and we would then
expect MFAT to raise it with their
colleagues in-
New Zealand
... India because, yeah, that
would be our normal approach.
All right. Thank you very much for coming in today.
Thank you so much.
Really appreciate your insights on behalf of the Winegrowers Association.
Thank you.
Will you be back before the select committee in your job again?
No, I don't think so. Sale and supply of liquor act, I think, is going to be my
last one.
Oh, right.
Oh, wow.
So this might be the last one?
Yes, for this-
For this committee.
For this committee, yes.
Well, I'll just say thank you. How long has it been?
43 years in the industry, and 31 years, I
probably made my first submission in
1991 to this committee, I think so.
Very impressive. Thank you very much, and go well.
Thank you.
I thought it should be noted.
Mm.
Yes. Thank you.
Thank you.
Cheers.
Okay, we move now to Brent Nash.
Don't think he is.
Brent's not available. Okay.
Max.
We come then to Max Marshall, who is in the
public gallery. If you'd like to join us, Mr.
Marshall, we will
commence
with you. All right.
Okay, Mr. Marshall, you're aware of how the process works here.
We've got your submission.
Sure.
We have five minutes sit down. I'll hand over.
Thank you for the, good morning, and thank you for the opportunity
to speak.
Of the 50 or so years of Indian independence, we might
ask what has it meant today?
The various rulers that have ruled India, the Parsons, and the English, and
many others, have they understood the people or the land?
When we ask who is India waking up from the nightmare of history,
we might ask who is the person in our bed waking up next to
us? Finding the words that express caution is an art.
Identifying what are the known risks and knowing how to deal with a
political group and ascendancy.
What are the democratic growth behind the economic growth?
What are the negative aspects which will affect India,
impact India? What are the negative aspects which will affect
us doing business with India?
We don't have the right to poke India.
It has to discover democracy itself.
I agree that there is a difference between a constitutional secular
nation with a majority of Hindu population and a
theocratic Hindu state which might see Hinduism as its official
language. Religion, sorry. However, the
sectarianism of the Hindua movement appears to
miniaturize a broad idea of a large India, proud of its
heterodox past and purist present, and replace it
with a smaller version of India,
bundled around a drastically reductionist version of Hinduism
with an anti-Muslim bias.
I would like to go and talk about the Asian value rather than Indian
values.
This colorblindness to seeing Asian values and their
distinction from Western values, particularly in East Asia,
from Singapore to Malaysia.
There's a invoking of Asian values in a special
natureHave occurred in dubious
circumstances, for instance, and it's used to justify
authoritarianism.
To put it in perspective, if we were to be dealing with
a political equivalent of a European nation,
which
was operating under a similar religious or
philosophical ideology,
some of us would be forgiven for thinking that it was fascist.
Indeed, the tolerance of heterodoxy and the
acceptance of variations of religious belief and customs
is deeply rooted in India. However, the intolerance of
the Hindutva's narrow and intolerant view of
Hinduism amounts to denying a good deal of
Indians' history that Indians have a reason to remember and
celebrate, and indeed, this is championed by the Indian
diaspora. However, so much of the
public
support of religion being politically inconsequential in India,
the unqualified approval of the Modi government
and accounts of its success by Indians abroad, no
Western
politician can claim in the same measure.
The bellicose
and narrow version of Hindutva is at conflict with the
capricious nature of the generous and liberal traditions of Hinduism,
but that is what is offered here politically.
The concern I have is that the analysis I've offered
today,
amongst those only interested in financial terms,
those making this treaty on behalf of
our country, I think is missing.
All right. Thank you very much. Any quick questions for Mr. Marshall?
No, but thank you so much.
All right. Thank you very much for your insights. Appreciate your time. Cheers.
Okay. Is Mr. Nash online?
He isn't. Okay. All right. That brings us to an end of the public
session for today.